# uc-severity-multiomics
ABSTRACT: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic autoimmune condition defined by intestinal inflammation and concurrent microbiome dysbiosis. Here, we advance the understanding of host-microbiome interactions governing UC by collecting six meta–omic datasets profiling host and microbial molecules in 40 patients displaying a wide range of clinically assessed disease activity (remission to severe). The six datasets provided unique evidence toward a central hypothesis of proteolysis co-occurring with increased disease activity. Metaproteomics identified Bacteroides proteases as a distinguishing feature of severity. Shotgun metagenomics guided taxonomic inferences and revealed that the Bacteroides association was driven primarily by changes in protein and not DNA abundances. Potential evidence of a host response to Bacteroides serine proteases was found in the increase of serum and fecal serine protease inhibitors. Metapeptidomics added evidence of protease activity as an increase of peptide fragments was present among the patients with high severity. In addition, we compare prediction of severity and clinical parameters between data types. In total, our meta-omic platform has provided compelling integrated evidence for host-microbiome interactions during UC and opens the door for protease inhibition as a therapeutic approach for severe UC patients.

This repository contains the code used to generate the analyses for this manuscript. Supplementary files referenced in the code are available through MassIVE.
